Build  DB Server and Interact With DB Using an App


Goal:
Leveraging an AWS-managed database instance for solving relational database needs.


###Objectives

Launch an Amazon RDS DB instance with high availability.
Configure the DB instance to permit connections from your web server.
Open a web application and interact with your database.


###Task 1: Create a Security Group for the RDS DB Instance
In this task, you will create a security group to allow your web server to access your RDS DB instance. The security group will be used when you launch the database instance.

In the AWS Management Console, select the  Services menu, and then select VPC under Networking & Content Delivery.

In the left navigation pane, click Security Groups.

Click Create security group and then configure:

Security group name: DB Security Group

Description: Permit access from Web Security Group

VPC: Lab VPC

You will now add a rule to the security group to permit inbound database requests. The security group currently has no rules. You will add a rule to permit access from the Web Security Group.

In the Inbound rules section, click Add rule, then configure:

Type: MySQL/Aurora (3306)

Source: Type sg in the search field and then select Web Security Group.

This configures the Database security group to permit inbound traffic on port 3306 from any EC2 instance that is associated with the Web Security Group.

Scroll to the bottom of the screen, then click Create security group

You will use this security group when launching the Amazon RDS database.

 

Task 2: Create a DB Subnet Group
In this task, you will create a DB subnet group that is used to tell RDS which subnets can be used for the database. Each DB subnet group requires subnets in at least two Availability Zones.

In the AWS Management Console, select the  Services menu, and then select RDS under Database.

In the left navigation pane, click Subnet groups.

 If the navigation pane is not visible, click the  menu icon in the top-left corner.

Click Create DB Subnet Group then configure:

Name: DB Subnet Group

Description: DB Subnet Group

VPC ID: Lab VPC

In the Add subnets section for Availability zones, click the , then:

Select  the first Availability zone

Select  the second Availability zone

For Subnets, click the , then:

For the first Availability zone, select  10.0.1.0/24

For the second Availability zone, select  10.0.3.0/24

Click Create

This adds Private Subnet 1 (10.0.1.0/24) and Private Subnet 2 (10.0.3.0/24). You will use this DB subnet group when creating the database in the next task.

 

Task 3: Create an Amazon RDS DB Instance
In this task, you will configure and launch a Multi-AZ Amazon RDS for MySQL database instance.

Amazon RDS Multi-AZ deployments provide enhanced availability and durability for Database (DB) instances, making them a natural fit for production database workloads. When you provision a Multi-AZ DB instance, Amazon RDS automatically creates a primary DB instance and synchronously replicates the data to a standby instance in a different Availability Zone (AZ).

In the left navigation pane, click Databases.

Click Create database

 If you see Switch to the new database creation flow at the top of the screen, please click it.

Choose Create database, then choose Standard create.

Under the Engine options section, for Engine type, choose MySQL.

For Engine version, choose the latest version.

For Templates, choose Dev/Test.

For Availability and durability, choose Multi-AZ DB Instance.

Under Settings, configure the following:

DB instance identifier: lab-db

Master username: main

Master password: lab-password

Confirm password: lab-password

Under Instance configuration, configure the following for DB instance class:

Select  Burstable classes (includes t classes).

Select db.t3.medium. 

Under Storage, configure:

Select General Purpose (SSD) under Storage type.

Under Connectivity, configure:

Virtual Private Cloud (VPC): Lab VPC

Under VPC security group select Choose existing

Under Existing VPC security groups

Use X to Remove default.

Select DB Security Group to highlight it in blue.

Under Monitoring, expand Additional configuration and then configure the following:

For Enhanced Monitoring, uncheck  Enable Enhanced monitoring.

Scroll down to the  Additional configuration section and expand this option. Then configure:

Initial database name: lab

Under Backup, uncheck  Enable automated backups.

 This will turn off backups, which is not normally recommended, but will make the database deploy faster for this lab.

Scroll to the bottom of the screen, then click Create database

Your database will now be launched.

Click lab-db (click the link itself).

You will now need to wait approximately 4 minutes for the database to be available. The deployment process is deploying a database in two different Availability zones.

 Note: If you are prompted with the Suggested add-ons for lab-db window, choose Close

 While you are waiting, you might want to review the Amazon RDS FAQs or grab a cup of coffee.

Wait until the Status changes to Modifying or Available.

Scroll down to the Connectivity & Security section and copy the Endpoint field.

It will look similar to: lab-db.cggq8lhnxvnv.us-west-2.rds.amazonaws.com

Paste the Endpoint value into a text editor. You will use it later in the lab.

 

Task 4: Interact with Your Database
In this task, you will open a web application running on your web server and configure it to use the database.

Copy the WebServer IP address by selecting i AWS Details above these instructions you are currently reading.

Open a new web browser tab, paste the WebServer IP address and press Enter.

The web application will be displayed, showing information about the EC2 instance.

At the top of the web application page, click the RDS link.

A picture displaying the web application interface

Figure: A picture displaying the web application interface.

 

You will now configure the application to connect to your database.

Configure the following settings:

Endpoint: Paste the Endpoint you copied to a text editor earlier

Database: lab

Username: main

Password: lab-password

Click Submit

A message will appear explaining that the application is running a command to copy information to the database. After a few seconds the application will display an Address Book.

The Address Book application is using the RDS database to store information.

Test the web application by adding, editing and removing contacts.

The data is being persisted to the database and is automatically replicating to the second Availability Zone.
