Network Hardening Using Amazon Inspector and AWS Systems Manager

Objective:
Configure Amazon Inspector
Run an agentless network audit
Investigate the scan results
Update security groups
Log in to an application server instance using AWS Systems Manager Session Manager

The current environment has two EC2 instances. 
One instance is a bastion server named BastionServer in a public subnet.
The other instance is an application server named AppServer in a private subnet.
 

Task 1: View EC2 instances and add tags
To create an assessment target for Amazon Inspector Classic to assess, you start by tagging the EC2 instances that you want to include in your target. In this task, you tag the BastionServer instance. 

Every AWS tag consists of a key and value pair of your choice. For example, you might choose to name your key Name and your value MyFirstInstance.

In the AWS Management Console, choose Services  and select EC2.

If you see New EC2 Experience at the upper-left of your screen, confirm that  New EC2 Experience is selected. This lab is designed to use the new Amazon EC2 console.

In the left navigation pane, choose Instances.

The running BastionServer and AppServer EC2 instances are listed.

Choose the BastionServer instance.

Choose the Tags tab.

Choose Manage tags.

Choose Add tag, and then enter the following information:

Key: SecurityScan
Value: true
Choose Save.
Summary of Task 1
You have successfully applied tags for the BastionServer instance, which allows the security scan to find and scan this instance.

 

Task 2: Configure and run Amazon Inspector
In this task, you learn how to run an agentless network audit on your EC2 instances using Amazon Inspector. For this lab, you use the network reachability rules package.

Use case: It might not be possible to install agents on all hosts in your deployment. Not all types of operating systems support Amazon Inspector agents. Using this method, you will be able to run network audit on all hosts.

In the AWS Management Console, choose then Services menu. Then choose Security, Identity, & Compliance and choose Inspector.

To open the navigation pane, choose  on the left.

Choose Switch to Inspector Classic 

Choose Get started.

Choose Advanced setup.

In the Define an assessment target section, configure the following options:

For Name, enter Network-Audit
Clear the check box for All Instances.
For Tags: Key, choose SecurityScan.
For Tags: Value, choose true.
Clear the check box for Install Agents.
Choose Next.

In the Define an assessment template section, configure the following options:

For Name, enter Assessment-Template-Network
For Rules packages, leave Network Reachability-1.1 selected, but choose the  next to each of the other packages to remove them. 
For Duration, choose 15 Minutes.
Clear the check box for Assessment Schedule.
Choose Next.

Choose Create.

You should see a SUCCESS notification, which confirms that the assessment run was initiated. It takes about 3-5 minutes to complete.
While you wait, learn more about Amazon Inspector.

Check the status of the scan:

In the left navigation pane, choose Assessment runs.
In the Amazon Inspector - Assessment Runs section, choose the  in the row for the run that you initiated to expand it and access more options for your run.
To see the status of the run, choose Show status. If you do not see Show status, choose  at the top.
To close and return to the previous screen, choose Close.
Once the status changes to Analysis complete, choose Findings in the left navigation pane.
Summary of Task 2
In this task, you created an assessment target (a collection of the AWS resources that you want Amazon Inspector Classic to analyze). Then you created an assessment template (a blueprint that you use to configure your assessment). You used the template to start an assessment run, which is the monitoring and analysis process that results in a set of findings.

 

Task 3: Analyze Amazon Inspector findings
The findings that these rules generate show whether your ports are reachable from the internet through an internet gateway (including instances behind Application Load Balancers or Classic Load Balancers), a VPC peering connection, or a virtual private network (VPN) through a virtual gateway. These findings also highlight network configurations that allow for potentially malicious access, such as mismanaged security groups, ACLs, and internet gateways.

Choose  to expand the high-severity finding. You should see the following key details:

AWS agent ID shows you the affected EC2 instance.
Description shows the reason for the finding. In this case, TCP port 23, which is associated with Telnet, is reachable from the internet.
Recommendation provides remediation suggestions.
 Telnet is a text-based terminal emulation utility that is part of the TCP/IP suite of protocols. It allows a system to connect to a remote host to perform commands as if you were on the console of the remote machine.

Choose  to expand the medium-severity findings and analyze the details.

For the medium-severity finding, TCP port 22, which is associated with SSH, is reachable from the internet.
 SSH, like the Telnet utility, gives a user the ability to log in to a remote machine and perform commands as if they were on the console of that system. Telnet, however, is insecure because its data isn't encrypted when communicated. SSH provides a secure, encrypted tunnel to access another system remotely. 

 

Task 4: Update security groups
In this task, you see a few remediation options for the security findings that Amazon Inspector discovered. The first option shows how to lock down port 22 to specific IP addresses. 

Choose  to expand the details of the high-severity finding.
In the Recommendation section, choose the link to the security group. The link should look similar to the following example: sg-0b2dc685cd6e6e706.
When the link opens, you can see the BastionServerSG security group that is attached to the BastionServer that has produced findings within Amazon Inspector.
Choose the Inbound rules tab.
These are the current inbound rules for this security group. They are also the high and medium findings that Amazon Inspector caught.
Choose Edit inbound rules.
For the inbound rule associated with port range 23, choose Delete.
 Port 23 Telnet is vulnerable to security attacks, and the SSH protocol helps you to overcome many security issues of Telnet. SSH is now the only major protocol to access the network devices and servers over the internet.
For the SSH rule, remove the current inbound IP address of 0.0.0.0/0 by choosing the X next to it to update the resource.
The 0.0.0.0/0 IP address for inbound rules means that port 22 is accessible from anyone on the internet.
You can adjust the inbound rules so that only your IP address is able to access port 22. Although this option is much more secure, it still has vulnerabilities. For example, someone could access the computer that is associated with that IP address and gain access.
For Source, choose the Custom dropdown list, and then select My IP.
Choose Save rules. 
Re-scan the environment
Navigate to the browser tab that has Amazon Inspector open. In the left navigation pane, choose Assessment templates.

Select the check box next to Assessment-Template-Network, and choose Run.

This step runs the same scan from earlier in the lab and produces findings from the security group updates.
Note The scan takes approximately 30-60 seconds to complete.

In the left navigation pane, choose Assessment runs, and refresh every 10-15 seconds until the Status changes to Analysis complete.
In the left navigation pane, choose Findings, and then choose Date to sort by most-recent findings.
The high-severity finding is now gone, but the medium-severity finding remains. Although port 22 was scoped down to allow access to only your IP address, port 22 is still technically open to the internet outside the VPC. 
Summary of Task 4
In this task, you updated the security group attached to the BastionServer so that it allows traffic from only your IP address instead of the open internet and removed the wide-open and no-longer-needed Telnet port.

 

Task 5: Replace BastionServer with Systems Manager
In this task, you replace the BastionServer instance, which has primarily used SSH to connect to the AppServer within the private subnet. Instead, you use Session Manager via Systems Manager. 

Systems Manager is a secure end-to-end management solution for hybrid cloud environments. Systems Manager is the operations hub for your AWS applications and resources and consists of four core feature groups.

In the AWS Management Console, choose Services  and select EC2.

In the left navigation pane, choose Security Groups.

Choose the Security group ID for BastionServerSG.

Choose Edit inbound rules.

Choose Delete, and then choose Save rules to remove the SSH inbound rule.

In the left navigation pane, choose Instances.

Select the check box for BastionServer. Then choose the Instance state  dropdown list, and choose Stop instance.

In the confirmation dialog, choose Stop.

Next, connect to the AppServer directly using Session Manager.

With Session Manager, you can quickly and securely access your EC2 instances through an interactive one-click browser-based shell or through the AWS Command Line Interface (AWS CLI) without the need to open inbound ports, maintain bastion hosts, or manage SSH keys.

Select the check box next to AppServer, and then choose Connect.
You are now connected directly to the AppServer.
Enter in the following Linux commands to change the directory and to view the current working directory of the AppServer. 

cd ~
pwd
The output should look like the following: /home/ssm-user

Final scan of the environment
Go to your browser tab that has Amazon Inspector open.
In the left navigation pane, choose Assessment runs.
Select the check box for the previously run assessment, and then choose Run.
Wait for the Status to show Analysis complete, and choose  to expand the details of the most recent assessment run.
Verify that there are zero Findings. 
